DS: White dwarfs and neutron stars  have exhausted  their fuel so they have shrunk to become some 
of the densest objects in the universe.  Most interesting to Stephen Hawking is what happens when 
the very biggest stars collapse in on themselves.   
 
What would be the fate of those countless stars, with greater mass than a white dwarf or 
neutron star, when they had exhausted nuclear fuel?  The problem w as investigated by 
Robert Oppen heimer, of later atom bomb fame. In a couple of papers in 1939, with George 
Volkoff and Hartland Snyder, he showed that such a star could not b e supported by 
pressure. And that if one neglected pressure, a uniform spherically systematic symmetric 
star would contract to a single point of infinite density. Such a point is called a singularity.  
 
DS: A singularity is what you end up with when a giant star is compressed  to an unimaginably small 
point. This  concept has been a defining theme in Stephen Hawking’s career. It refers  to the end of 
a star but also something more fundamental:  that a singularity was the starting -point for the 
formation of the entire universe. It was  Hawking’s mathematical work on  this that earned him 
global recognition.  
 
All our theories of space are formulat ed on the assumption that space time is smooth and 
nearly flat, so they break down at the singularity, where the curvature of space -time is 
infinite. In fact, it marks the end of time itself. That is what Einstein found so objectionable.  
 
DS: Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity says tha t obje cts distort the space time around them. 
Picture a bowling -ball lying on a trampoline, changing the shape of the material and causing  smaller 
objects to slide towar ds it. This  is how the effect of gravity  is explained . But if the curves in 
spacetime  become deeper an d deeper, and eventually infinite, the usual rules of space and time no 
longer apply.  
 
Then the w ar intervened. Most sci entists, including Robert Oppen heimer, switched their 
attention to nuclear physics, and the issue of gravitational collapse was largely forgotten.  
Interest in the subject revived with the discovery of distant objects, called quasars.  
 
DS: Quasars are the br ightest objects in the unive rse, and possibly the most distant detected so far. 
The name is short for ‘quasi -stellar radio sources’ and they are believed to be discs of matter 
swirling around black holes .    
 
The first quasar,  3C27 3, was discovered in 1963. Many other quasars were so on discovered. 
They were bright, despite being at great distances. Nuclear processes could not account for 
their energy output, because they release only a percent fraction of their rest mass as pure 
energy. The only alternative was gravitational energy, r eleased by gravitational collapse.  
 
Gravitati onal collapses of stars were re -discovered. It was clear that a uniform spherical star 
would contract to a point of infinite density, a singularity.   
 
The Einstein equations can't be defined at a singularity. This means at this point of infinite 
density, one can't predict the future. This implies something strange could happen whenever 
a star collapsed. We wouldn't be affected by the breakdown of predict ion, if the singularities 
are not naked,  that is, they are not shielded from the outside .  
 DS: A ‘naked’ singularity is a theoretical scenario in which a star collapses but an event horizon does 
not form around it  – so the singularity would be visible .  
 
When John Wheeler introduced the term black hole in 1967, it replaced the earlier name, 
frozen star. Wheeler's coinage emphasized that the remnants of collapsed stars  are of 
interest in their own right, independently of how they were formed. The new name c aught 
on quickly. It suggested something dark and mysterious, But the French,  being French, saw a 
more risque  meaning. For yea rs, they resisted the name trou noi r, claiming it was obscene. 
But that was a bit like trying to stand against  Le Week -end, and ot her Franglais . In the end, 
they had to give in.  Who can resi st a name that is such a winner?  
 
From the outside, you can't tell what is inside a black hole.  You can throw television sets, 
diamond rings, or even your worst enemies into a black hole, and al l the black hole will 
remember is the total mass, and the state of rotation. John Wheeler is known for  
expressing this principle as “a black hole has no h air”. To the French, this just confirmed 
their suspicions.   
  
A black hole has a boundary, called the event horizon. It is where gravity is just strong 
enough to drag light back, and prevent it escaping. Because nothing can travel faster than 
light, everything else will get dragged back also. Falling through the even t horizon is a bit like 
going over Niagara Falls in a canoe. If you are above the falls, you can get away if you paddle 
fast enough, but once you are over the edge, you are lost. There's no way back. As you get 
nearer the falls, the current gets faster. Th is means it pulls harder on the front of the canoe 
than the back.  There's a danger that the canoe will be pulled apart. It is the same with black 
holes. If you fall towards a black hole feet first, gravity will pull harder on your feet than 
your head, bec ause they are nearer the black hole.  
 
The result is you will be stretched out longwise, and squashed in sideways. If the black hole 
has a mass of a few times our sun  you would be torn  apart, and made into spaghetti  before 
you reached the horizon. However,  if you fell into a much larger black hole, with a mass of a 
million times the sun, you would reach the horizon without difficulty. So, if you want to 
explore the inside of a black hole, make sure you choose a big one. There is a black hole 
with a mass of about four million times that of the sun, at the centre of our Milky Way 
galaxy.  
 
DS: Scientists believe that there are  huge black hole s at the centre of virtually all galaxies – a 
remarkable thought, given how recently these features were confirmed in the first place.   
 
Although you wouldn't notice anything particular as you fell into a black hole, someone 
watching you from a distance would never see you cross the event horizon.  Instead, you 
would appear to slow down, and hover just outside.  Your image would get dimmer and 
dimmer, and redder and redder, until you were effectively lost from sight. As far as the 
outside world is concerned, you would be lost for ever.  
 
There was a  dramatic advance in our understandin g of these mysterious phenomena  with a 
mathematical discovery in 1970. This was that the surface area of the event horizon, the 
boundary of a black hole, has the property that it always increases when additional matter 
or radiation falls into the black hole. These properties suggest that there is a resemblance between the area of the event horizon of a black hole, and conventional Newtonian physics, 
specifically the concept of entropy in thermodynamics. Entropy can be re garded as a 
measure of the disorder of a system, or equivalently, as a lack of knowledge of its precise 
state. The famous second law of thermodynamics says that entropy always increases with 
time. This discovery was the first hint of this crucial connectio n.  
 
DS: Entropy  means the tendency for anything that has order to become more disordered as time 
passes – so, for example, bricks neatly stacked to form a wall (low entropy) will eventually end up in 
an untid y heap  of dust  (high entropy). And this process is described by the second law of 
thermodynamics .  
 
Although there is clearly a similarity between entropy and the area of the event horizon, it 
was not obvious to us how the area could be identified as the entropy of a bl ack hole itself. 
What would be meant  by the entropy of a black hole?  The crucial suggestion was made in 
1972 by Jacob Bekenstein, who was a graduate student at Princeton University, and then at 
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. It goes like this. When a black hole is created by 
gravitational collapse, it rapidly settles down to a stationary state, which is characterized by 
only three parameters: the mass, the angular momentum, and the electric charge. Apart 
from these three properties, the black hole pres erves no other details of the object that 
collapsed.  
 
His theorem has implications for information, in the cosmologist's sense of information: the 
idea that every particle and every force in the universe has an implicit answer to a yes -no 
question.  
 
DS: Information , in this context, means all the details of every particle and force associated wi th an 
object. And  the more disordered something is  – the higher its entropy - the more information is 
needed to describe it. As the physicist and broadcaster Jim A l-Khalili puts it, a well -shuffled pack of 
cards has higher entropy and therefore needs far more explanation, or information, than an 
unshuffled one.   
 
The theorem implies that a large amount of information is lost in a gravitational collapse. 
For example , the final black -hole state is independent of whether the body that collapsed 
was composed of matter or antimatter, or whether it was spherical or highly irregular in 
shape. In other words, a black hole of  a given mass, angular momentum  and electric charg e, 
could have been formed by the collapse of any one of a large number of different 
configurations of matter. So what ap pears to be the same black hole  could be formed by the 
collapse of a large number of different types of star. Indeed, if quantum effects  are neglected, 
the number of configurations would be infinite, since the black hole could have been formed 
by the collapse of a cloud of an indefinitely large number of particles, of indefinitely low mass. 
But could the number of co nfigurations really be infinite?  
 
The uncertainty  principle of quantum mechanics  implies that only particles with a 
wavelength smaller tha n that of the black hole itself  could form a black hole. That means the 
wavelength would be limited: it could not be infinite.  
 
DS: The uncertainty principle, conceived by the famous German physicist Werner Heisenberg, 
describes how we can never locate or predict the precise position of the smallest particles . So, at what is called the quantum scale, there is a fuzziness in nature, ver y unlike the  more ordered 
universe describ ed by Isaac Newton.  
 
It therefore appears that the number of configurations that could form a black hole of  a 
given mass, angular momentum  and electric charge, although very large, may also be finite. 
Jacob Bekenst ein suggested that from this finite number, one could interpret the entropy of 
a black hole. This would be a measure of the amount of informat ion that was irretrievably 
lost during the collapse when a black hole was created.  
 
The apparently fatal flaw in Bekenstein's suggestion  was that if a black hole has a finite 
entropy that is proportional to the area of its event horizon, it also ought to have a finite 
temperature, which would be proportional to its surface gravity. This would imply that a 
black hole could be in equilibrium with thermal radiation, at some temperature other than 
zero. Yet according to classical concepts, no such equilibrium is possible, since the black 
hole would absorb any thermal radiation that fell on it, but by definition would not be able 
to emit anything in re turn. It cannot emit anything. I t cannot emit heat.  
 
DS: If information is lost, which is apparently what is happening in a black hole, there s hould be 
some release of energy - but that flies in the face of the theory that nothing comes out of black 
holes.  
  
This is a paradox. And it's one which I am going to return to in my next lecture, when I'll be 
exploring how black holes challenge the most basic principle about the predictability of the 
universe, and the certainty of history, and asking what would happen if you ever got sucked 
into one. Thank you.  
 
DS: So Stephen Hawking has taken us on a scientific journey from Einstein’s claim that stars could 
not collapse to the acceptance of the reality o f black holes to a  collisio n of theories over h ow these 
weird features exist and function .  
 
The second lecture will bring us  up to date with the latest thinking on black holes, and will ask  us to 
change the way we think of them.  
 
bbc.co.uk/reithlectures  
 
   
 
 
 
Transcript of audience Q and A after the first lecture  
SUE LAWLEY: Thank you. Thank you very much indeed, Stephen. Well now we asked 
listeners what they’d like to ask you and their questions came flooding in, hundreds of them. 
We’ve chosen a representative selection of topics and invited some of those listeners to 
come and put their questions in person. You’ll appreciate, audience, that we had to give 
Stephen the questions beforehand, so that he could programme his answers into his 
computer. This is done letter by letter  through the movement of his facial muscles and 
you’ll hear little tiny bleeps as the infrared detector picks up those movements. It’s not a 
speedy process, round about a word a minute, but the answers are all in there now. So if 
you’re ready, Professor, l et me begin by asking Andy Fabian, who’s an astronomer and 
astrophysicist – he’s the Director of the Institute of Astronomy at Cambridge and therefore 
a colleague of Stephen’s – Andy, your question please?  
ANDY FABIAN: Stephen, m uch of the work by yoursel f and others on issues such as the 
potential loss of information in black holes and on radiation from black holes is theoretical 
and lacks observational support  so far . Do you see ways to change th at situation using the 
many and varied observations now rou tinely being made of accreting black holes throughout 
the cosmos?  
SUE LAWLEY : Stephen ? 
STEPHEN HAWKING : I assume you are referring to the area increase law for black hole 
horizons. The best way of testing this is black hole collisions rather than accretio n. 
SUE LAWLEY: Well you got pretty short shrift there, I have to say. (laughter) Perhaps you 
should tell us what the difference is between accreting black holes and black hole collisions?  
ANDY FABIAN: Well black hole collisions are when you have two black holes colliding with 
each other and merging together. Accretion is just matter dribbling into the black hole 
steadily and it produces enormous amounts of energy release, very luminous things in the 
universe.  
SUE LAWLEY: Do you foresee that there will be e vidential proof of what Stephen is talking 
about? As you say, it’s all theoretical at the moment.  
ANDY FABIAN: It would be fantastic to find observational proof of it, but I myself don’t see 
how to do it.  
SUE LAWLEY: Okay well let’s pursue this theme of wh at black holes get up to when we’re 
looking at them, and indeed when we’re not, and turn to a group of young enthusiasts here 
from the West Midlands. They’re pupils from Barr Beacon Secondary School in Walsall and 
they’re aged around 12 or 13. Kate Harris,  you’re their teacher. How have you got them 
interested in cosmology and everything else?  
KATE HARRIS: Well I’m their form tutor, so I look after them every morning. I received an 
email from one of the science teachers who’s with us, Dr Butterworth, about Stephen’s 
lecture and told them about it. And they were so keen to know more because first ly they’ve 
seen him in ‘The Big Bang Theory’… (laughter)   
SUE LAWLEY: This is the television … the American sitcom?  KATE HARRIS: Yes. And also they are keen science enthusiasts. They just wanted to know 
more.       
SUE LAWLEY: Yeah, so endlessly interested . Well let’s have a question from one of them. 
Aruniya Muraleedaran, you’re aged 12. What’s your question?  
ARUNYA MU RALEE DARAN: What kind of things would happen if one black hole collided 
with another one?  
STEPHEN HAWKING : If two black holes collide and merge to form a single black hole, the 
area of the event horizon around the resulting black hole is greater than the sum of the 
areas of the event horizons around the original black holes.  
SUE LAWLEY: Did you understand that, Aruniya? Did you get your head  round it? (laughter) 
Well, as I understand it, it’s when two black holes collide, the total circumference is greater 
than the sum of the two parts. The whole area increases. Got it?  
ARUNYA  MURALEEDARAN : I’ve got it now. (laughter) What about you? Did you … Do 
you want to say something?  
STUDENT: Yeah, I did understand it.  
SUE LAWLEY: You did?  
STUDENT: A bit, a bit. (laughter)   
APPLAUSE  
SUE LAWLEY: Well maybe it was because I explained it to you. (laughter) Now to a rather 
more personal question – and we r eceived many of them actually. This is from a 17 year old 
Radio 4 listener. His name is Duncan McKinnon. You told us, Duncan, that Stephen had 
been an inspiration to you. In what way?  
DUNCAN McKINNON: Well watching the film with him, it was really inspirat ional how he 
managed to carry on with his dreams and goals.  
SUE LAWLEY: You mean the film ‘The Theory of Everything’ …  
DUNCAN McKINNON: Yeah, yeah.      
SUE LAWLEY: … which starred Eddie Redmayne …  
DUNCAN McKINNON: Yeah.  
SUE LAWLEY: … for which he won an O scar of course. Great film, wasn’t it? Okay, like to 
put your question?  
DUNCAN McKINNON: I would like to ask you what inspired you to keep on going despite 
all the rough times in your life?  SUE LAWLEY: Stephen?  
STEPHEN HAWKING : I think my work and a sens e of humour have k ept me going. When I 
turned 21 my expectations were reduced to zero. You probably know this already because 
there’s been a movie about it. In this situation, it was important that I came to appreciate 
what I did have. Although I was unfor tunate to get motor neurone disease, I have been very 
fortunate in almost everything else. I have been lucky to work in theoretical physics at a 
fascinating time, and it’s one of the few areas in which my disabilit y was not a serious 
handicap. It’s also im portant not to become angry, no matter how difficult life may seem, 
because you can lose all hope if you can’t laugh at yourself and life in general.  
SUE LAWLEY: We have here Lucy Hawking, Stephen’s daughter, just towards the front 
there. Lucy, you have se en Stephen over the past four decades if you don’t mind my saying 
that. (laughter)  
LUCY HAWKING: That’s a little personal, Sue. (laughter)  
SUE LAWLEY: I apologise, Lucy.  
LUCY HAWKING: That’s okay. It’s radio, Sue.  
STEPHEN HAWKING: (interjecting) I would b ring back Einstein. (laughter)  
SUE LAWLEY: Interjection from my right. You’ve seen him, Lucy, weather some pretty 
rough times. What do you put his resilience and this determination down to?  
LUCY HAWKING: I think he’s enormously stubborn (laughter) and has a very enviable wish 
to keep going and the ability to summon all his reserves, all his energy, all his mental focus 
and press them all into that goal of keeping going. But not just to keep going for the 
purposes of survival, but to transcend this by produc ing extraordinary work, writing books, 
giving lectures, inspiring other people with neurodegenerative and other disabilities, and 
being a family man, a friend and a colleague to so many … so many people and keeping up 
with friends across the world. So I th ink there … there are lots and lots of elements there, 
but I do think the stubbornness, the will to live and – like he says himself – the sense of 
humour to laugh at it, at the end of the day is what has …  
STEPHEN HAWKING: (interjecting) I would bring back Einstein. (laughter/applause) He would 
be amazed at how much general relativity has advanced our understanding of the world.  
LUCY HAWKING: I think that was his way of asking me to stop talking. (laughter)  
SUE LAWLEY: And there we must e nd. Thank you for making this a memorable event. 
There’s a mass of science on the BBC Reith website, including Robert Oppenheimer, whom 
Stephen mentioned – one of the fathers of the atom bomb; the astrophysicist Martin Rees; 
the radio astronomer Bernard Lo vell and many more. There’s an archive of recordings and 
transcripts going back to 1948, so do have a look.  For now our thanks to our hosts here at the Royal Institution in London and of course huge 
thanks to our Reith Lecturer, Professor Stephen Hawking.  
 
THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME 
AS IT WAS BROADCAST. THE NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC NOR 
THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION 
HERE . 
bbc.co.uk/reithlectures  
 
   
 
 
