Since that time, the mathematical evidence that bla ck holes emit thermal radiation  has been 
confirmed by a number of other people with various different approaches. One way to 
understand the emission is as fol lows. Quantum mechanics implies  that the whole of space is 
pairs of virtual and anti particles , filled with pairs of virt ual part icles and antiparticles , that 
are constantly materializing in pairs, separating, and then co ming together again, and 
annih ilating each other.  
 
DS: This concept  hinges on the idea that a vacuum is never totally empty. According to the 
uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics, there is always the chance that particles may come 
into existence, however briefly . And this would always involve  pairs of particles, with opposite 
characteristics , appearing and disappearing . 
 
These particles are called virtual because unlike real particles  they cannot be observed 
directly with a particle detector. Their indirect effects can nonetheless be measured, and 
their existence has been confirmed by a small shift, called the Lamb shift, which they 
produce in the spectrum energy o f light from excited hydrogen atoms. Now in the presence 
of a black hole, one member of a pair of virtual particles may fall into the hole, leaving the 
other member witho ut a partner with which to annih ilate. The forsaken particle or 
antiparticle may fall into the black hole after its partner, but it may also escape to infinity, 
where it appears to be radiation emitted by the black hole.  
 
DS: The key here is that the formation and disappearance of these particles norm ally passes 
unnoticed. But if the process  happens right on the edge of a black hole, one of the pair may get 
dragged in while the other is not . The particle that  escapes would then look as if it’s  being spat out 
by the black hole.  
 
A black hole of the mass of the sun, would leak particles at such a slow rate, it would be 
impossible to detect. However, there could be much smaller mini black holes with the mass 
of say, a mountain. A mountain -sized black hole would give off x -rays and g amma rays, at a 
rate of about ten million m egawatts, enough to power the world's electricity supply. It 
wouldn't be easy however, to harness a mini black hole.  You couldn't keep it in a power 
station, because it would drop through the floor  and end up at the centre of the Earth. If we 
had such a black hole, about the only way to keep hold of it  would be to have it in orbit 
around the Earth.  
 
People have searched for mini black holes of this mass, but have so far not found any. This  is 
a pity, because if they had  I would have got a Nobel Prize.  Another possibility , however, is 
that we might be able to create micro black holes in the extra dimensions of space time.  
 
DS: By ‘extra dimensions ’, he means something beyond the three dimension s that we are all fami liar 
with in our everyday lives , plus the fourth dimension of time. The idea  arose as part of an effort to 
explain why  gravity is so much weaker than other forces such as magnetism – maybe i t’s also 
having  to operate in parallel dimensions.  
 
According to some theor ies, the universe we experience  is just a four dimensional surface  in 
a ten or eleven dimensiona l space. The movie Interstellar  gives some idea of what this is 
like. We wouldn't see t hese extra dimensions  because light wouldn't propagate through 
them but only through the four dimensions of our universe. Gravity , however, wo uld affect the extra dimensions  and would be much stronger than in our universe. This would make it 
much easier to form a lit tle black hole in the extra dimensions. It might be possible to 
observe this at the LHC, th e Large Hadron Collider, at CERN  in Switzerland. This consists 
of a circular tunnel, 27 kilometre s long.  Two beams of particles travel round this tunnel in 
opposite  directions, and are made to collide. Some of the collisions might create micro 
black holes. These would radiate particles in a pattern that  would be easy to recognize. So I 
might get a Nobel Prize  after all.  
 
DS: The Nobel Prize in Physics is awarded  when a t heory is “tested by time” which in practice 
means confirmation by hard evidence. For example, Peter Higgs was among scientists who , back in 
the 1960s, suggested the existence of a particle that would give other  particle s their mass. Nearly 
50 years later, two different detectors at the Large Hadron Collider spotted signs of what had 
become known as the Higgs Boson. It was a triumph of s cience and engineering, of clever theory 
and hard-won evidence. A nd Peter Higgs and Francois Englert , a Belgian scientist, were jointly 
awarded the prize. No physical proof has yet been found of Hawking Radiation.  
 
As particles escape from a black hole, the hole will lose mass, and shrink. This will increase 
the rate of emission of particles. Eventually, the black hole will lose all its mass, and 
disappear. What then happens to all the pa rticles and unlucky astronauts that fell into the 
black ho le? They can't just re -emerge when the black hole disappears. It appears that the 
information about what fell in is lost, apart from the total amount of mass, and the amount 
of rotation. But if information is lost, this raises a serious problem that strikes at the heart 
of our understanding of science.  
 
For more than 200 years, we have believed in scientific determinism, that is, that the laws of 
science determine the evolution of the universe. T his was formulated by Pierre -Simon 
Laplace , who said that if we know the state of the universe at one time, the laws of science 
will determine it at all future and pas t times. Napoleon is said to have asked Laplace  how 
God fitt ed into this picture.  Laplace replied, “Sire, I have not needed that hypothesis. ” I 
don't think that Laplace  was claiming that God  didn't exist. It is just that h e doesn't 
intervene to break the laws of s cience. That must be the position of every scientist. A 
scienti fic law is not a scientific law  if it only holds when some supernatural being decides to 
let things run  and not intervene.  
 
In Laplace 's determinism, one needed to know the positions a nd speeds of all particles at 
one time, in order to predict the future. But there's the uncertainty relationship, discovered 
by Walter Heisenberg in 1923, which lies at the heart of quantum mechanics.  
 
This holds that the more accurately you know the posi tions of particles, the less accurately 
you can know their speeds, and vice versa. In other words, you can't know both the 
positions and the speeds accurately. How then can yo u predict the future accurately?  The 
answer is that although one can't predict th e positions and speeds separately, one can 
predict what is called the quantum state. This is something from which both positio ns and 
speeds can be calculated  to a certain degree of accuracy. We would still expect the universe 
to be deterministic, in the se nse that if we knew the quantum state of the universe at one 
time, the laws of science should enable us to predict it at any other time.  
 DS: What began as an explanation of what hap pens at an event horizon  has deepened into an 
exploration of some o f the most important philo sophies  in science  - from the clockwork world of 
Newton to the laws of Laplace to the uncertainties of Heisenberg  – and where they are challenged 
by the mystery of black holes.  Essentially, information entering a black hole should be destroy ed, 
according to Einstein’s Theor y of General Relativity while quantum theory says  it cannot be broken 
down, and this remains an unresolved question.  
 
If information were lost in black holes, we wouldn't be able to predict the future, because a 
black hole  could emit any collection of particles. It could emit a worki ng television set, or a 
leather -bound volume of the complete works of Shakespeare, though the chance of such 
exotic emissions is very low. It might seem th at it wouldn't matter very much  if we c ouldn't 
predict what comes out of black holes. There aren't any black holes near us. But it is a 
matter of principle. If determinism, the predictability of the universe, breaks down with 
black holes, it could break down in other situations. Even worse, if determinism breaks 
down, we can't be sure of our past history either. The history books and our memories 
could just be illusions. It is the past that tells us who we are. Without it, we lose our 
identity.  
 
 
It was therefore very important to determine whet her information really was lost in black 
holes, or whether in principle, it could be recovered. Many scientists felt that information 
should not be lost, but no one could suggest a mechanism by which it could be preserved. 
The arguments went on for years. Finally, I found what I think is the answer. It depen ds on 
the idea of Richard Fey nman, that there isn't a single history, but many different possible 
histories, each with their own probability. In this case, there are two kinds of history. In 
one, there i s a black hole, into which particles can fall, but in  the other kind  there  is no black 
hole.  
 
The point is  that from the outside, one can't be certai n whether there is a black hole  or not. 
So there is always a chance that there isn't a black hole. This poss ibility is enough to 
preserve the information, but the information is not returned in a very useful form. It is like 
burning an encyclop aedia.  Information is not lost if you keep all the smoke and ashes, but it 
is difficult to read.  The scientist Kip Thor ne and I  had a bet with another physicist, John 
Preskill, that information would be lost in black holes. When I discovered how information 
could be preserved, I conceded the bet. I gave John Preskill an encyclop aedia. Maybe I 
should have just given him the  ashes.  
 
DS: In theory, and with a purely deterministic view of the universe, y ou could burn an encyclopaedia  
and then reconstitute it  if you knew the characteristics and position of every atom making up every 
molecule of ink in every letter  and kept track of them all at all times.  
 
Currently I'm working with my Cam bridge colleague Malcolm Perry and Andrew Strominger 
from Harvard  on a new theory based on a mathematical  idea called supertranslations to 
explain the mechanism by which informati on is returned out of the black hole. The 
information is encoded on the horizon of the black hole. Watch this space.   
 
DS: Since the Reith Lectures were recorded, Prof Hawking and his co lleagues have published a 
paper  which makes a mathema tical case that information can be  stored in the event horizon. The theory  hinges on information being transformed into a two -dimensional hologram in a process 
known as supertranslation s. The paper, titled Soft H air on Black Holes, offers a highly revealing 
glimpse into  the esoteric  language of this field http://arxiv.org/pdf/1601.00921v1.pdf  and the 
challenge that scientists  face in trying to explain it.  
 
What does this tell us about whether it is possible to fall in a black hole, an d come out in 
another universe? The existence of alternative histories with black holes suggests this might 
be possible. The hole would need to be large, and if it was rotating, it might have a passage 
to another universe. But you couldn't  come back to our universe. So although I'm keen on 
space flight, I'm not going to try that.  
 
DS: If black holes are rotating, then their heart may not consist of a singularity in the sense of an 
infinitely dense point. Instead, there may be a singularity in the form of a ring . And t hat leads to 
speculation abou t the possibility of not only falling  into a black hole but also travelling through one . 
This would mean leaving the universe  as we know it. And  Stephen Hawking concludes with a  
tantalising thought : that there may something on the other side.  
 
The message of this le cture  is that black holes ain't as black as they are painted. They are 
not the eternal prisons they were once thought. Things can get out of a black hole, bo th to 
the outside, and possibly to another universe. So  if you feel you are in a black hole, don't 
give up. There's a way out.  Thank you very much.  
 
bbc.co.uk/reithlectures  
 
   
 
 
 
Transcript of audience Q and A after the second  lecture  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Professor Hawking, thank you very much indeed. So we’ve been taken on a trip to the 
outer regions of the universe, to the brink of human understanding and beyond. Listeners have sent 
in hundreds of questions for the professor and some of them are here with us now in the lecture 
theatre of the Royal Institution in London t o put their questions in person. Can we have our first 
questioner, please? She’s Marie Griffiths who comes from Godalming in Surrey, a civil servant at the 
Department for Education and has always been interested in physics. Your question, please, Marie?  
 
MARIE GRIFFITHS: Did the Big Bang start just one universe or all the multiverses?  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Stephen?  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: Some theories about the Big Bang allow for the creation of a very large and 
complex universe, maybe even many universes. However, even if there were other universes, we 
wouldn’t know about them. Our connected component of space time is all we can know.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: It’s all we can know, Marie. And it’s quite enough, by the sound of it. Let’s have our 
next question – a question from John Brook myre from Middlesbrough who describes himself as an 
ordinary working bloke and a lifelong learner. He couldn’t unfortunately get here today, but let me 
put his question to you for him, Stephen. If you were a time lord, what moment in time would 
interest yo u and why?  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: I would like to meet Galileo. He was the first modern scientist, who realized the 
importance of observation. Galileo was the first person to challenge the received wisdom that the 
ancient Greeks, and Aristotle in particular, wer e the ultimate authority in science. Galileo pointed 
out that simple observations, like dropping weights from a height, show things do not work the way 
Aristotle said. This must have been seen by many people, but they had put it down to imperfect 
observati ons, or other reasons. But Galileo said the ancients were actually wrong and started to 
work out the correct laws from the observations. That makes him the father of modern science. He 
followed his nose, and was a bit of a rebel. (laug hter)  
 
SUE LAWLEY: A r ebel who was forced to recant, of course. Right I’m going to come to Dara O’Briain 
over here on the right. Dara, the entertainer and science graduate. He studied pure mathematics 
and theoretical physics at University College Dublin in preparation for his c areer as a stand -up comic. 
(laughter) So you’re an expert, are you Dara, on both physics and humour?  
 
DARA O’BRIAIN: Yes, yeah, we overlap in some ways. Given that Stephen has appeared twice in The 
Simpsons, he has a more successful comedy career than I do.  (laughter)  
 
SUE LAWLEY: But he was your boyhood hero, wasn’t he?  
 
DARA O’BRIAIN: There was a huge … Yes I remember receiving a copy of A Brief History of Time for 
my Christmas when I was about 16. I had the pleasure this year of meeting him and having it 
autographed as it were and spending some time with Stephen this year. It was an honour.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Okay ask him another question.  
 
DARA O’BRIAIN: Well actually given the chance, I turned the opportunity of this question over to 
some physicists I know – in pa rticular Jim Al -Khalili. Professor Jim Al -Khalili wanted to ask a question 
from within the scientific community. As he said, most of the people in the physics community 
would indeed see the confirmation of Hawking radiation, which Professor Hawking invente d in 1974, 
as being worthy of a Nobel Prize since it would have been the first theoretical prediction that 
required both quantum mechanics and relativity. Does Professor Hawking believe that Hawking 
radiation will be observed in his lifetime? And if it is observed, where does he think this 
experimental evidence will come from?  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: I am resigned to the fact that I won't see proof of Hawking radiation directly, 
though there are solid state analogues of black holes and cyclotron effects that the N obel committee 
might accept as proof. (laughter) But there's another kind of Hawking radiation coming from the 
cosmological event horizon of the early inflationary universe. I’m now studying whether one might 
detect Hawking radiation in primordial gravitat ional waves. So I might get a Nobel Prize after all.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: (laughter) A new kind of Hawking radiation then from light years earlier. Does that 
excite you Dara?  
 DARA O’BRIAIN: It does say one thing, however – that the work that Professor Hawking’s bee n 
doing, theoretically and has been doing??, has skipped so far ahead of what we can do 
experimentally that there will be for a long time people racing to keep up with this work.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: So I dare say you think that, whatever happens, he should get the  Nobel Prize, huh?  
 
DARA O’BRIAIN: If it was done by public acclaim, if it was a phone vote, (laughter) but the Swedes 
are notoriously sticky about that kind of stuff. So yeah, but I do believe - yes.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Okay. Chris Cooke, a 25 year old product des igner from Crawley in Sussex. Chris 
studied mechanical engineering, so he’s always been interested in physics. In his spare time, he does 
stand -up comedy, Dara, “despite my introverted … (laughter) despite my introverted personality 
traits”, he says. Chris , your question?  
 
CHRIS COOKE: Do you feel that using a speech device to communicate has changed your personality 
in any way? As an introvert, has it made you more extroverted?  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Stephen?  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: Well I am not sure I have ever been called  an introvert before. (laughter) Just 
because I spend a lot of time thinking doesn’t mean I don’t like parties and getting into trouble. 
(laughter) I enjoy communicating and I enjoy giving popular lectures about science. My speech 
synthesizer has been very  important for this, even though I ended up with an American accent. 
(laughter) Before I lost my voice, my speech was slurred, so only those close to me could 
understand, but with the computer voice I found I could talk to everyone without help. So it has 
allowed me to express my personality rather than changing it.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Thank you very much for that question. Another questioner, Patrick Donaghue. He’s a 
set designer who lives and works in London. Your question, Patrick?  
 
PATRICK DONAGUE: Professor Haw king, do you think the world will end naturally or will man destroy 
it first?  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Professor Hawking, just a small question. (laughter)  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: We face a number of threats to our survival from nuclear war, catastrophic 
global warming, and g enetically engineered viruses. The number is likely to increase in the future, 
with the development of new technologies, and new ways things can go wrong. Although the chance 
of a disaster to planet Earth in a given year may be quite low, it adds up over t ime, and becomes a 
near certainty in the next thousand or ten thousand years. By that time we should have spread out 
into space, and to other stars, so a disaster on Earth would not mean the end of the human race. 
However, we will not establish selfsustain ing colonies in space for at least the next hundred years, so 
we have to be very careful in this period. (laughter) Most of the threats we face come from the 
progress we have made in science and technology. We are not going to stop making progress, or 
reve rse it, so we have to recognize the dangers and control them. I'm an optimist, and I believe we 
can.  
 
SUE LAWLEY: Well I don’t know about the world, but we’re definitely running out of time. We’ve got 
one last question from Tara Struthers who’s originally f rom the Orkneys, which may account for her 
lifelong interest in astronomy. These days she works for a film production company.  
 TARA STRUTHERS: If you had to offer one piece of advice for future generations of scientists, namely 
physicists and cosmologists,  what would it be?  
 
STEPHEN HAWKING: Science is a great enterprise and I want to share my excitement and enthusiasm 
about its success. From my own perspective, it has been a glorious time to be alive and doing 
research in theoretical physics. There is nothi ng like the Eureka moment of discovering something 
that no one knew before. So my advice to young scientists is to be curious, and try to make sense of 
what you see. We live in a universe governed by rational laws that we can discover and understand. 
Despi te recent triumphs, there are many new and deep mysteries that remain for you to solve. And 
keep a sense of wonder about our vast and complex universe and what makes it exist. But you also 
must remember that science and technology are changing our world dr amatically, so it’s important 
to ensure that these changes are heading in the right directions. In a democratic society, this means 
that everyone needs to have a basic understanding of science to make informed decisions about the 
future. So communicate pla inly what you are trying to do in science, and who knows, you might even 
end up understanding it yourself. (laughter)  
 
SUE LAWLEY: And there we must end. Newton was once asked how he’d managed to understand so 
much about the laws of the universe and he answ ered: "by thinking of these things continually." 
Those of us who rely on others to do their thinking for them, are very glad that we have men like 
Stephen Hawking. His lectures will be available on the BBC Reith website where you’ll find 
recordings, transc ripts and videos - an archive of all 67 series of Reith Lectures going back to 1948. 
For now, from the Royal Institution in London, our thanks to the BBC Reith Lecturer Professor 
Stephen Hawking. And goodbye.  
 
APPLAUSE  
 
 
THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME 
AS IT WAS BROADCAST. THE NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC NOR 
THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION 
HERE . 
 
bbc.co.uk/reithlectures  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
